---
title: My GSoC 2019 application process experience
category: "experience"
cover: gsoc.png
author: sahil jajodia
---

Hello guys. I started preparing for GSoC even before the official organization's list was released for this year. At first, I started looking for Machine Learning related organizations and projects but considering how much I know about machine learning and deep learning so far, I thought that it would be better to choose some other project. There were some not so difficult projects in Machine learning but the competition was very high in such projects (yes even way before the organization's list was released) that I thought it would be very hard getting selected for such projects. So then I started looking for some other options.

I found CERN to be a potentially good organization for myself. While applying for their Openlab summer student programme, I had done some research on their projects and found them to be quite interesting. The projects were highly scalable and would require good software engineering and DevOps skills. So then I looked at the past year projects of CERN at GSoC. Even though the projects looked daunting at first, after doing some research, I found them to be interesting. Now for this year, CERN started releasing the project list in early February. After going through the list extensively, I particularly liked two projects the most. Those projects were of the umbrella organizations under CERN named Rucio and SWAN. Now here I would suggest not to get carried away by big names like CERN, Tensorflow, Numfocus, etc. You might as well like the projects there and write a fairly good proposal. In the next two paragraphs, I will write my experience of how did I proceed with writing each of my proposals. For both, Rucio and SWAN, the procedure was a bit different.

For Rucio, I joined its Slack channel in early February, when the organization list for GSoC 2019 was not officially released by Google. But CERN, as I mentioned earlier, already released a list of projects for this year. Now, CERN conducts a test for every project, that you need to pass before proceeding to write the proposal. So after joining the channel, I was provided a test which I completed successfully in two days. My mentor then said that once the organization list is officially released by Google, I can start writing my proposal. On March 27 this year, CERN was officially declared as an organization of GSoC. I immediately asked my mentors about the details of my project and if there are any predefined templates that they have for proposal. They said no about template, so I started making my own template for the proposal. The template can be divided into 3 major parts ie. Header, Main and Footer. The header contains your details and the synopsis of your project. Also, why you chose this project and organization and what is your motivation behind it. The Main part as the name suggests is strictly focused on the important details such as the design and architecture of the project and how would you actually implement the project and then test your implementations. Also, it should contain a plan with milestones indicating exactly what will you complete in the three coding phases. The footer contains some of your personal information like your internship experiences, how much time will you dedicate, etc. This template that I have specified here is what I think a good proposal should have as it covers all the important parts that Google specifies you to have in a proposal. Your proposal does not have to be the same but make sure all the important parts are there in the proposal.

For SWAN’s project, I contacted the mentors around the same time when I contacted Rucio’s mentors. They also had a test for the project that I selected. They gave me the test around 5th March, after the official organization list from Google was released. I completed the test successfully in a day. Now, they didn’t have a slack channel like Rucio so all the communication was through email. So, it took more time to contact them as compared to the Rucio mentors and it also meant that I didn’t know with whom I was competing for the project. So make sure you contact the mentors immediately after the official list of organizations is released by Google or even before that if you are sure the organization is definitely going to be selected. This would not only give you more time to interact with the mentors but will also make mentors think of you as a potentially good candidate for the project. Also, one tip would be to do the research and collect and write as many questions as possible during the weekend as most of the mentors do not work on weekends. I did the same and was able to get answers to a lot of questions very quickly during the weekdays. As for the proposal, I used the same template for it as I specified above.


So you should start very early in the proposal writing process as it gives you an added cushion if something goes wrong in the between. Also, be sure to be in touch with the mentors constantly and make iterations to the proposal after asking them the questions. For my case, the mentors were really very nice and my proposal writing process went very smoothly. Also, make sure you do not ask the complete design and implementation plan from them because this is YOUR project and they expect you to provide solutions. So this was my experience with the GSoC 2019 application process. All the best to all the applicants (I am an applicant too) and hope that May the 6th be with us :P
